---
layout: episode
permalink: /stops/7/
type: stop
section_title: Medicine
title: Touch object replica phrenology head
page_rank:
stop_id:
audio_file: /medicine/A_2 Phernological heads.mp3
hero_images:
  - path: Medicine_touch_rph.jpg
    alt_text: Phrenological bust, by J. De Ville, London, 1821. © The Board of Trustees of the Science Museum Science Museum Group Collection
  - path: Medicine_touch_rph2.jpg
    alt_text: Phrenological bust, by J. De Ville, London, 1821. © The Board of Trustees of the Science Museum Science Museum Group Collection

---

## Touch object: replica phrenology head

This is a model of a human head, which you’re welcome to touch and explore.
It’s attached to a white table at a height of 75 centimetres. Heads like these
were used to teach phrenology – the theory that measuring the shape of a
person’s skull could reveal their intelligence and character.

The model is at one end of a free-standing display, so it’s possible to walk
all round it. But to hear the description, position yourself so that the head
is facing towards you, and the large print and Braille labels are to the left.

This model of a head is smaller than life size. As you move your fingers over
the skull, you can feel that it has raised bumps and lines on it. This is
because the skull has been divided up into small sections. In the early 1800s,
phrenology theorists believed that, by feeling and measuring the skull,
they could gain insight into people’s character and abilities.
The sections correspond to areas of the brain they thought were responsible
for different personality traits. They thought that the larger the section of
the skull – and therefore the underlying brain – the more prominent the person’s
personality traits were in that area.  There were a number of different theories
about what parts of the brain were responsible for different personality traits.

You can feel the lines between the sections. Each section – between the lines –
has been given a number. Some of these numbers are raised – so you can feel them.
Others are etched into the surface – so they’re more difficult to feel.

Some numbers occur twice – once on each side. For example, on each temple is a
number 18. According to a theory of phrenology, the size and shape of this
area revealed a person’s love of new and unexpected things.   

PAUSE

And at the back of the head, behind each ear, is the number 5. They thought
this area indicated a person’s courage – or possibly a tendency to get into trouble.  
Classifying people by their skull shape and size led to many racist
and sexist ideas. It was eventually disproven.

PAUSE

The model relates to the displays nearby. On the back half of this display,
behind the model of the head, is a set of sixty miniature heads, dating from 1831,
which were used for teaching. And, to the right of the head as you face it,
at right angles to the aisle, is a long glass cabinet called ‘Measuring the Mind’.
This features a selection of original phrenological heads similar to the model.  
